= SLAC 2020: OPAL Developers Retreat
:doctype: book

== POSTPONED

[discrete]
=== Dates: TBD, 2022

[discrete]
=== Location: SLAC in Menlo Park, CA.

[discrete]
=== Logistics

* The recommended hotel is the Stanford Guesthouse, on SLAC's campus:
https://rde.stanford.edu/hospitality/stanford-guest-house/[Link to Guesthouse]
* There is a public Stanford Shuttle service to SLAC and campus during the weekdays:
https://transportation.stanford.edu/marguerite[Link to shuttle schedule]
* Most activities will be in building 52, 3rd floor, King's River conference room:
https://vue.slac.stanford.edu/slac-visitor-map[Link to SLAC map]
* Seminars will take place building 52, 1st floor, in the Mad River conference room.
* There is ample free parking on site for those driving in (see map).

[discrete]
=== Important note on the guesthouse:

If there are no spots available online, call and add your name to the waitlist. +
You might still have a chance at a room on site. +
Room bookings are in flux because of construction and down time.

[discrete]
=== Schedule

Following is tentative schedule for the week. This is fluid (will change a little), and new items are welcome.  +
For all presentations and discussion sections, a zoom link will be available (and posted here soon).

[discrete]
=== Empty time slots are for coding and group or individual work.

|===
| Time | Monday,&nbsp; | Tuesday,&nbsp; | Wednesday,&nbsp; | Thursday,&nbsp; | Friday,&nbsp;

| 9&nbsp;am
| Introduction, organizational stuff, set up workplace +
 +
'Remarks on the status and future of OPAL' (Andreas)
| Presentation Beam Dynamics and LUME at LCLS (Nicole /Chris M.)
|
|
| Stanford Campus Tour?

| 10&nbsp;am
|
| SLAC Tour part 1
|
|
| Cantor Art Museum, Cactus Garden, Hoover Tower on Campus?

| 11&nbsp;am
| Flow over and questions/discussion
| SLAC Tour part 2
|
|
|

| 12&nbsp;pm
| Lunch
| Lunch
| Lunch
| Lunch
| Lunch

| 1&nbsp;pm
|
| Review on Git/Gitlab/development workflow +
- branches vs forks +
- working with merge requests +
- code reviews +
Discussion potential next steps: +
- detailed simulation of +
diagnostics +
- symplectic integrator +
- Python API
| Discussion next steps for Exascale: +
- GPUs +
-1-1 simulations +
- Quantum computing? +

|
|

| 2&nbsp;pm
|
|
|
|
|

| 3&nbsp;pm
|
| Seminar 'TBD' (Andreas)
|
| Seminar 'A Bright Future for Muons' (Chris R.)
|

| 4&nbsp;pm
|
|
|
|
|

| 5&nbsp;pm
| (open end)
| (open end)
| (open end)
| (open end)
| (open end)
|===

[discrete]
=== On Site Participants

* Andreas Adelmann
* Achim Gsell
* Chris Rogers
* Nicole R Neveu
* Chris Mayes

[discrete]
=== Remote Participants

* Matthias Frey
* Pedro Calvo Portela
* Christof Metzger-Kraus
* Jochem Snuverink

[discrete]
=== Topics up for discussion (round table)

The colleagues in parenthesis are suppose to lead/prepare the discussion.

* Integration of features   (A. Adelmann)
 ** Matthias Frey's AMR solver
 ** Pedro Calvo Portela's thesis work
 ** Envelope tracker (bet)
 ** Full wave solver (Arnau)
* pyOPALTools (M. Frey)
* non-heterogenous architectures (A. Adelmann)
* Improved TW field map reader (N. Neveu)
* Status of pyOPAL (Ch. Rogers)
* OPAL Paper (A. Adelmann)
* Status of code cleanup (A. Gsell)
* Stuff https://gitlab.psi.ch/OPAL/src/issues/227[from the last retreats]
